---
layout: post
title:  "A Glimpse of Heaven: The Nidaros Cathedral Choir"
crawlertitle: "A Glimpse of Heaven: The Nidaros Cathedral Choir"
summary: "opinions are my own"
excerpt: "Review of the fantastic concert held on 20/10/17 by the Nidaros Cathedral Choir and re:sound Orchestra"
date:   2017-10-20 17:09:47 +0800
categories: posts 
tags: 'review'
type: 'long'
author: michael
---
My expectations were high leading into this presentation of Puccini’s <i>Messa Di Gloria</i>, a world premiere in Singapore. The Nidaros Cathedral Choir were supposedly a world famous choir flown in all the way from Norway, and I have enjoyed re:sound concerts before and think they are one of the best local orchestras. When I sat down, I felt like there was almost no way the music could match the excitement and anticipation I had for the concert. The first half was to be a selection of choral music, followed by the Puccini Mass.

I was wrong. The concert both exceeded my expectations and subverted them. When I heard about the programme, I cynically mentioned to some of my friends that Puccini’s Mass had to be placed after the intermission to prevent everyone from going home before the Norwegian songs and folktunes. Little did I know, this thirty minute selection of choral and organ pieces turned out to be the highlight of the evening. Ranging from famous composers such as Mendelssohn to the little-known Norwegian composer Lars Soraas, every song was perfectly prepared, and the accompanying organist Magne Draagen was compelling and unfazed by slight mistakes. Such was the confidence of his playing that I’m truly not sure if I heard any wrong notes at all, despite the dissonance of some of the harmonies.

For the choir, every member of the alto and soprano section performed from memory (perhaps the minds of the older men are not what they once were!). The Nidaros Cathedral Choir is traditional in the sense that there are no females, and their alto and soprano section is composed entirely of prepubescent boys. Despite them being all around 8-12 years old, their memory was nearly unshakable and their intonation basically flawless. Almost all of these little boys also had solo parts in these songs, and here was the only place nerves took hold. Although most of the solos were sung well, there were definitely a few shaky notes and entrances. Nevertheless, I found every single one of these songs to be absolutely compelling, and full of my favourite goosebump moments. The men of the choir supported the higher voices superbly, never overpowering them despite their deep timbre. This is clearly a well-rehearsed group familiar with acoustic and balance.

Where the balance came into question was in the second half of the concert, where the re:sound orchestra took to the stage for Puccini’s <i>Messa Di Gloria</i>. Especially in the opening Kyrie, I felt that the orchestra often drowned out the beautiful lines of the choir, making it a struggle to hear them properly. In this respect, the young voices are also somewhat guilty, as they could not project through the thick sound of even a small orchestra. More could have been done to give them their fair due though. For me, the tempo of the Kyrie was also rather fast, and perhaps did not pay enough respect to the sorrowful nature of the text. 

The orchestra also proved to be more prone to nerves than the choir, with many flubs and suspect notes during their solo lines. The first flautist in particular is going to need a strong drink after her piccolo playing tonight. Having said that, I’ve had a friend tell me that playing the piccolo is like commanding a whiny child, so perhaps I can forgive her. Here I must make exception for the clarinets, who made no discernible mistake through the entire concert. The strings were also largely disaster-free, which is something I’ve come to expect from Singaporean orchestras.

Thankfully, the ensemble was back on track for the magnificent Gloria, for me the most well composed movement in this Mass. I think that Puccini’s Mass is a very flawed masterpiece, evidence of the composer’s inexperience as it was written when he was only eighteen (for his graduation, no less!). The Gloria however is composed nearly perfectly, and the choir and orchestra gave it the respect it deserved. How the choir performed the Gloria fugue from memory is beyond me, and upon the final chord the hall burst into uncontainable applause. I was only too glad to join in this applause between movements, such was the magnificence of what I had just heard.

This brings us to the Credo, which is more Dies Irae than Credo. I really wonder about the strength of Puccini’s faith when hearing this movement. Here, the orchestra took charge in delivering the sombre, almost macabre feeling of the opening, once again leaving the voices behind. In this case, I feel like the choir could not really provide this dark tone considering the youth of the performers. It’s therefore a bit more acceptable to me that the orchestra would take the stage in setting the mood and tone of the movement. I am honestly not a fan of young boys taking the female parts, especially when performing works from the Romantic Period onwards. Such a compromise was probably inevitable, although it did hurt the performance a bit.

The tenor solo of “Et Incarnatus Est” was enough to bring the audience to applaud again. While Thomas Ruud is a great singer, I couldn’t help but feel he is a little bit past his prime, especially compared to the youthful vigour of the other singers. This applause was rather jarring to me, as the crowd was going wild right before the part where Jesus is crucified. Kind of awkward.

Here I must make a special mention to the audience. While they were largely polite and attentive during the first half, the sheer size of Puccini’s Mass (it lasts about an hour) was enough to put quite a number to sleep. Worst of all were those who grew restless and started chatting throughout. The four teenagers behind me were particularly culpable, and their comments were incredibly ignorant and I question why they even went if they weren’t interested (“Why doesn’t the singer use a mic?” was a comment I particularly enjoyed). Although I know I must sound like a pretentious asshole by bringing this up, I really wish that there would be more concert etiquette in Singapore. Don’t think you can impress your girlfriends by bringing them to a concert like this. Classical music doesn’t mean girls think you are high class, I know this from personal experience.

The rest of the Credo was performed in a rather straightforward and average manner, but the ending <i>et vitam venturi</i> fugue was another breath of fresh air. The subject of this fugue and its treatment is extremely complex, and both choir and orchestra must be commended for keeping it held together so tightly. They definitely did their work on the fugues in rehearsal. Some erroneous clapping before the end of the movement thankfully kept the audience silence as the ensemble moved into the Sanctus and Benedictus. I think the conductor was grateful for this as well, considering how quickly he started the Sanctus after the Credo.

These movements were probably the best of the night. Perhaps having warmed up a little, Ruud sung this with beautiful phrasing and purpose. When I heard the Hosanna choir, I could literally imagine angels singing from heaven, and it was a moment I will never forget. The Agnus Dei seemed more like an afterthought after this brilliance, and honestly who can blame them? Puccini wrote this movement as an afterthought, with very little meaning given to the phrase <i>donna nobis pacem</i> (give us peace). Stick to Beethoven for a well written Agnus Dei.

Finally allowed to cheer freely, the audience paradoxically seemed to have a rather lukewarm response considering the brilliance of what they had just heard. There were however a few people standing (myself included), and we thankfully got two wonderful encores. The first was a choral arrangement of the famous Singaporean song “Home”, and while it is not really my thing I enjoyed the arrangement very much. I think it must have been written by someone familiar with the Nidaros Choir, as it really suited them very well. It was definitely nice to have them recognise our local culture as well as their own Norwegian one, and many audience members were standing and cheering after they had finished. Some were standing and cheering before they were done, and while I appreciate their passion it made it a little difficult for me to focus.

The second encore was right down my alley however; it was the Hallelujah chorus that ends the second act of Handel’s <i>Messiah</i>. Here the choir really shone, and this made it the third fugue that they have memorised for this concert. Considering that the second show tomorrow will have a completely different program for its first half, the memory of these children is miraculous. 

It is really these young boys who stole the show for me. Throughout the concert they were constantly shining no matter what happened on stage. I must bring particular attention to their discipline, whenever they had to move for their solos or respond to conductor’s cues, they always did it in perfect unison. I hope that they didn’t have to go through too much pain to have this level of discipline beaten into them. If they did, I have to say: it was absolutely worth it.

If you are free tomorrow night, please go watch this concert. It was by far the best concert I’ve attended this year, and is truly a transcendental experience. When Nidaros returns with Handel or Bach, I will be first in line for the best seats.

A little thing that I noticed, but couldn’t fit in the main body of this review:

Due to the applause after the Gloria, the choir needed help to place the first C natural of the Credo. The fact that they could pick up on the faintest cue from the cellos was incredible, and shows the focus and discipline of the choir. To most members in the audience, it would have sounded like someone in the cello section accidentally hit one of his strings. Remarkable ensemble work and professionalism.
