---
layout: post
title:  "Freude! My Choral Experience"
crawlertitle: "Freude! My Choral Experience"
summary: "opinions are my own"
excerpt: "Some thoughts about being a part of TPO's Beethoven Cycle"
date:   2017-10-16 17:09:47 +0800
categories: posts
tags: 'review'
type: 'long'
author: michael
---
Singing in a choir has been one of my better experiences in NAFA. Despite what people might think, I’ve enjoyed choir since my first year where we did The Creation, but the first time it really “clicked” for me was when we did the Bruckner/Part concert in the esplanade together with the SSO and SSC. This was not just because of the music, but the chance to experience what it’s like to be a professional musician in a proper setting. 

This opportunity to hear a great work from on stage with an orchestra is a priceless experience for me. As much as I am a part of the performance, honestly I’m more interested in listening to the music live from a different perspective. It’s definitely not the same as just buying tickets to a concert, and the process of rehearsals while tiring is a great learning experience. I especially enjoy listening to the orchestra rehearse in private rehearsals, where insights into the work can be gained very easily. This is compared to open rehearsals, where often not much is done and the idea is to project as positive an image as possible to the audience in an attempt to sell tickets.

The recent concert that concluded yesterday was a similarly great experience, although it wasn’t perfect. Being able to sing Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony was not something I could have imagined I would have done in my life, and as cliché as it sounds it is truly a once in a lifetime experience. I think what TPO is doing with its Beethoven cycle is a fantastic thing, and in my opinion the programming has been almost perfect in the pairing of symphonies (except for Beethoven 4 and 7, but that seems inevitable when you consider how ideal the other pairings are). Bringing these nine wonderful symphonies to the public is exactly the kind of thing a relatively young orchestra should do, and the reception last night at least was pretty good, with a sold out concert hall. Beethoven 9 definitely has some pull even with the public of Singapore.

This full house may have contributed to the nervous energy that was present throughout the Ninth Symphony. Of course, I can’t talk about the First Symphony as I wasn’t on stage at the time, but from rehearsals I did think that the First was very well prepared. Most of all, it was distinctly Beethoven, as much as the First draws its inspiration from Beethoven’s contemporaries, especially Haydn. The orchestra must be commended for this stylistic awareness. They must be much closer to Beethoven now, having done eight of his symphonies so far.

Back to the Ninth however, there were definitely some nerves on stage during the many prominent solos of its four movements. The orchestra was at its best when everyone was together, consumed by the music, and it is hopefully this image that most of the audience members bring home. It’s definitely not the easiest symphony to play, and I myself sang my fair share of wrong notes, so I don’t blame the individual musicians from the occasional hiccup here and there.

Unfortunately, there was possibly another image the audience could have brought home from the concert. Due to space and security constraints, almost the entire soprano section had to sing from offstage. This led to a prolonged break after the third movement for them to enter, which hurts the music quite a lot. (Incidentally, the third movement was fantastic in its measured tempo, and the unfolding of the variations was very well executed.) What is worse than hurting the music though, is the visual presentation of these singers, who were placed right in front of the first row of the audience.

Safe to say, not everyone who went to last night’s concert has the trained ears to hear a slight lapse in intonation in the second bassoon, but they have eyes that see. Placing so many singers right in front of the audience not only looks dodgy, but it places a very high pressure on these singers to act totally professional during the entire twenty or so minutes of the fourth movement. I’m sure they did a good job, but even so it would have been very obvious when a few of them didn’t open their mouths to sing at some of the tricky parts; or that startled look when someone inevitably misses their entry. Beethoven’s Ninth is so difficult for the voice that it’s impossible to expect one to sing every single note, especially if they aren’t a voice major. We do listen with our eyes, and I think that this problem cannot be overstated. Especially for a concert that people pay to watch, the standard of presentation should be higher.

This is a problem that plagues musicians in Singapore, and I think that it’s important that we don’t live in our own bubble, and we actively work with the authorities to slowly solve problems like this. <b>We should not think that because we are Artists, we deserve every accommodation to perform our Great Art, and to hell with the authorities.</b> This will only cause more issues. We need to be humble and willing to work together with these people, who definitely have their reasons for their constraints. It’s definitely difficult, but small steps have to be made and hopefully eventually restrictions like this go away and compromises can be made. Ideally, classical music becomes popular enough that more concerts can be held in the Esplanade, where such restraints are much less rigid.

Despite these problems, this was still my second best choral experience after the previously mentioned Bruckner/Part concert. It has gotten me much closer to this symphony, which was already one of my favourites. It’s important that we play classics like this, even as we gradually introduce the masses to more obscure music. If someone has a great experience listening to a work they somewhat know, they are much more likely to try another concert, especially if the programme is similar. Someone who enjoyed last night’s concert might go listen to the Eroica another time. For me, this is the only way to heighten the public interest in classical music, and I hope last night’s concert has done its service to this goal.

