---
layout: post
title:  "Can Opera be Saved? <i>Cosi Fan Tutte</i> at the Esplanade Concourse"
crawlertitle: "Can Opera be Saved? <i>Cosi Fan Tutte</i> at the Esplanade Concourse"
summary: "opinions are my own"
excerpt: "Review of Singapore Pocket Opera Theatre's production of Cosi Fan Tutte"
date:   2018-03-23 17:09:47 +0800
categories: posts
tags: 'review'
type: 'long'
author: michael
---
When I first heard that Singapore Pocket Opera Theatre (SPOT) was staging a complete performance of <i>Cosi Fan Tutte</i>, I sighed. Singapore has a well-known record of amateurs biting off more they can chew and producing awful renditions of great works. The performances of the Faure and Brahms Requiems last year comes to mind, with the latter not even being performed with full orchestra (yes, I’m still upset.) When I heard that <i>Cosi Fan Tutte</i> was going to be done on the small stage of the esplanade concourse with only a piano, I feared the worst.

Despite this, I was still excited to watch; I think Mozart is the greatest writer of opera ever. Going with open ears and heart, I was rewarded for my faith with a show that was both engaging and touching. Straight from the overture, where members of the cast ran among the audience, I was hooked. Operalab (a new initiative under SPOT) had got something right straight off the bat: opera should be fun. This is something that every other production I’ve experienced in Singapore has somehow failed to grasp.

The singing was impressive as well, despite some nervy moments especially early on in the first act. Intonation seemed to fluctuate especially in some of the longer arias. However, the occasional flub can be forgiven in my opinion, considering the concert was free and the venue was not giving them any help either (the acoustic in the concourse is really really bad, I don’t know how they can continue to get away with it). What it never lacked was heart, and I was particularly taken by the characters of Don Alfonso and Despina. Although these two were the “villains” of the story, they were played by singers so full of charisma that I couldn’t help but fall in love with them. They were both not the best singers of the night technically, but for me the pair was easily the most memorable.

However, it is quite unfair for me to compare the six main cast members this way, as they shone the brightest when they were singing together. The sense that they were all on the same page was present throughout the concert. Where one stumbled, they always seemed to be able to get back on track together. The pianist in particular deserves special recognition here, reacting both to the conductor and instinctively on her own when trouble came. Her playing was incredible; the orchestral colours coming from that sad Yamaha was amazing. I’ve played on that piano before, trust me when I say it’s terrible. Hats off to her, I can only hope to play half as well as her one day. I’ve never felt so much emotion in the harmonies of the recitatives.

Indeed, the recitatives were even more impressive than the show-stopping arias of this opera. I’m not very good with language, but I definitely felt that these characters were having a natural conversation in Italian throughout the recitatives. They pushed the story forward very effectively, and the silences between recitative and aria were perfectly weighted, allowing just enough time for appreciation from the audience (this is rarely talked about, but is a very important part of Mozart operas!!). This was probably the most significant role of the conductor, simply to cue the beginning of the music. Once the singing started, everyone knew exactly what to do.

Technical hiccups aside, the cast of <i>Cosi Fan Tutte</i> really bore all on stage for us to see, and I think the audience appreciated the effort. In fact, one of my few complaints was the curtain call was too short! (normally I hate curtain calls, my friends can attest to that). I’ve honestly not seen such a genuinely positive reaction to opera in Singapore, where usually half the audience is asleep or just there to discuss business deals. In the concourse it was a joy for me to see people truly engaged in the music, some even singing along in the tutti parts! Perhaps it’s a good idea to keep our music out of our stuffy concert halls until we can address the concert-going attitude here. 

Singapore Pocket Opera Theatre punched well over their weight with this production. I will gladly watch any of these six cast members in future shows to come, sacred or secular. I’ve spent hundreds of dollars watching operas on the main stage of the Esplanade, <i>Turandot, Carmen</i>, the list goes on and on. I’m probably going to blow a couple hundred more on the upcoming productions <i>Aida</i> and <i>La Boheme</i>. Thanks to SPOT, this is the first time I’ve watched one for free, and the first time I’ve left with a smile on my face. With productions like this, opera could very well be a staple in Singapore within the next few decades. <i>Cosi Fan Tutte</i> will be on again next Friday, and it’s a show not to be missed.
