---
layout: post
title:  "Dialogues des Carmelites: Brilliant Staging, Mediocre Music"
crawlertitle: "Dialogues des Carmelites: Brilliant Staging, Mediocre Music"
summary: "opinions are my own"
excerpt: "Review of Singapore New Opera's production of Dialogues des Carmelites"
date:   2018-08-04 17:09:47 +0800
categories: post
tags: 'review'
type: 'long'
author: michael
---
I was pleasantly surprised at the price of the tickets for yesterday’s production of <i>Dialogues des Carmelites</i>. It’s rare that one can watch a fully staged opera for just fifteen dollars. Impressively, the production did not seem to cut costs anywhere despite the low price (unlike other companies which shall not be named where they seem to cut costs despite the high price), which is a credit both to the ingenuity of the stage director and the generosity of the National Arts Council in supporting this project.

The props were not big or grandiose, but combined with effective lighting and the powerful music of Poulenc they led to what is the most immersive operatic experience I have had in Singapore. The lightning and staging of this opera was by far it’s most impressive feature, with a few wooden stages brought to life with stunning lights and visual effects. There were scenes which were genuinely scary; as well as clever illusions generated by use of shadow. Costumes while simple were effective and told a story well, white for the nuns and black for everyone else. This visual design alone is worth seeing for the price. I have never seen a opera in Singapore that was passable in its visual presentation, and this was above and beyond passable. Absolutely spectacular.

Unfortunately, the rest of the production could not be held to this high standard. Immediately, the mind boggling decision to have this sung in English is one I cannot understand. Much of the original colour and word painting of the music is lost, and for what? It wasn’t possible for me to understand the sung English easily (as is generally the case in classical singing), and the subs that went along with the production were so dimly projected that they were almost illegible. Considering how good the lighting on stage was, someone else must have been in charge of the subtitles. 

It didn’t help then that some of the singers (especially the males) sang with a very strong Singlish inflection. I remember distinctly someone stressing the first syllable of the word “Public” so hard that I felt I was in my neighbourhood coffee shop complaining about the government. I have nothing against Singlish, but hearing its accents and intonations in the middle of a Poulenc opera is jarring and awkward. This problem is much easier disguised when the music is in a foreign language, as we don’t understand it that well so some mistakes in pronunciation can be glossed over and ignored. I can’t help but feel like this decision to sing in English was made to benefit the singers rather than the audience, which is an unhealthy habit in local opera. Can don’t like that anymore okay.

Thankfully, most of the main cast didn't suffer from these problems and were actually rather impressive (although I felt like they were shouting rather than singing sometimes). For such a tricky work, problems with intonation were few and most of the singing was acceptably musical without being anything too special. However, the singers were very heavily microphoned and there were occasional issues with the balance in volume. This led to parts where the singers could barely be heard, which was especially disappointing in the final scene’s <i>Veni Creator Spiritus</i>. It's a shame as I felt the Latin scenes (which are few and far between) should have been the most successful, yet most of them like this one fell short.

This was because the choir employed to sing these Latin texts from the <i>Requiem</i> and <i>Salve Regina</i> was not up to the standard of the main cast. The voices in the choir were not melded together well at all, sounding like 12 or 13 distinct voices all vying for attention. There was also overall way too much vibrato in these religious passages for my liking. I suspect that many of these choristers might be having their virgin choir experience on such a big stage, and it clearly shows. Many of them had good stage presence and acting skills for a semi-professional choir, but their singing let them down.

Thankfully, their stage presence helped them immensely in their final scene and the climax of the opera. This is where the nuns who form the choir walk offstage one by one to be executed by guillotine. Each and every singer left solemnly, taking their time but not holding up the queue and putting too much attention on themselves. I love to make fun of these things, but even for me I was absolutely captivated in the moment. 

I feel the simple act of walking off stage at the dramatic climax of a two hour work like that is not as easy as it seems, and everyone from stage director to orchestra to chorister deserves credit for pulling it off in a properly dramatic way. This scene falls apart if one part of the production is lacking and ends up looking cringy. However, the effect here was magnificent and to hear the singing of the choir diminuendo as they lost singer after singer to execution was an unforgettable experience. As a side note, the music got better and better as the singers died, which perhaps demonstrates the quality of the choir more effectively than anything I have said thus far.

Much like the singers on stage, the orchestra was also let down by a small segment of players, in this case the brass section. They were poor in tone and seemed to struggle greatly with some of the conductor’s cues. There seemed to be a awful lot of miscommunication around some of the entrances by all the sections; unfortunately I was sitting at an angle where I couldn't peek into the pit so I can't really explain this. Apart from these timing mishaps, the orchestra played with confidence but lacked musicality in general. A lot of the interludes seemed to be taken as a hassle rather than enjoyed and seemed to be rushed through. An exception to this was the winds and harp which I felt was wonderful throughout, and the only sections to understand the gravitas and colour of this work. 

While a flawed production, <i>Dialogues des Carmelites</i> is an experience that won't soon be forgotten and is an ambitious step forward into the operatic oeuvre in Singapore. If you look past the mistakes, there is a lot for the concertgoer to enjoy here. They are playing again this Sunday (5 August) at 630pm and I'd encourage everyone to go, especially if you are a musician. Just remember to listen to a French production on your way home for a glimpse at the true potential of this work.

