---
layout: post
title:  "La Boheme:Where Singing Trumps Staging"
crawlertitle: "La Boheme:Where Singing Trumps Staging"
summary: "opinions are my own"
excerpt: "Review of the concert production of La Boheme by the SSO"
date:   2018-05-01 17:09:47 +0800
categories: posts
tags: 'review'
type: 'long'
author: michael
---
Watching “concert” opera productions always feels like a risk to me. With the orchestra on stage and a lack of flashy props and costumes, it can be easy for the audience to lose focus and have their immersion in the opera ruined. With the unhealthy trend of pricing so-called “semi-staged” operas at the price of most fully staged ones, the music has to be nearly perfect for it to be worth it. However, the pull of a star studded cast (particularly Amber Blue from the Met!!!!) made me fork over what is probably too much money for a student to be spending. I honestly did not expect to get my money's worth.

Immediately, I was taken aback by an absolutely hideous backdrop for the opera, some kind of weird painted cloth that was draped over where the choir usually stands. I know someone probably put in a lot of effort into this, but for me it was a complete eyesore. The rest of the props were also similarly crude, but these were at least made use of in some occasionally compelling ways. The backdrop on the other hand was to me just a reminder that Singapore doesn’t have a scene that can sustain a properly staged opera. I was of course rather anxious about how the night was going to go, but in the end it turns out my worries were unfounded.

When it came to the music, tonight proved that we are ready to perform big operas confidently. While the interpretation of the music by the orchestra was rather timid, it was technically nearly perfect and had enough special moments in it that it would be unfair to call it uninspired. Any lack of magic was made up for by the brilliant main cast; a combination of soulful singing and commanding stage presence that meant not a single moment of the 2 hours was boring.

Of course, interesting doesn’t necessarily mean good, and some of the music did unfortunately fall flat in certain areas. In the early acts, some of the singing seemed to be a bit reckless and fell closer to shouting at times. In most Romantic operas (particularly Puccini and Verdi,) the orchestra holds beautiful long melodies while the singers have comparatively simple melodies; the singer is almost like an accompaniment to the orchestra. This leads to many singers belting out their lines with abandon and hoping the musicality of the orchestra will carry them safely. While this singing can be considered stylistic, I felt that in this first act the male singers took it too far and just whacked their lines without enough care. Here they were full of gung-ho spirit, but very empty in terms of intention.

Thankfully with the entrance of Mimi and the love duet between her and Rodolfo, we were treated to wonderful musicianship <i>and</i> near perfect intonation. Turns out it is possible to have good technique and be musical at the same time. Surprisingly for me, Rodolfo was the highlight of the night; even though normally I’m more partial towards female singers. He commanded the entire stage and his personality was absolutely infectious, backing up his natural stage presence with a rock-solid technique. He seemed never to tire no matter how many As and B-flats he had to belt out. It’s unfortunate then that the orchestra often was unable to keep up with the him and Mimi, with their accompaniment being just a little bit too metronomic to allow for a singer’s natural speech inflections and breathing.

Nowhere was this clearer than in <i>Si, Mi Chiamano Mimi</i>, where the first flute seemed completely incapable of playing together with the singer. This is of course no easy feat, but what frustrated me was that he seemed to have no intention of even trying to follow her through the second, lighter theme. He simply took every semiquaver equally while she had a certain ebb and flow to her words, including a <i>ritardando</i> that is clearly marked in my copy of the score. This is especially puzzling to me as the first flute and the rest of the woodwinds had a nearly flawless night, a first for the SSO (piccolo in particular was amazing as usual).

Flaws like this did plague the performance, examples include a really weird brass mistake in the fourth act (I’m still not too sure what happened, it felt like they came in a beat apart?), and some general messiness in the choir in Act 2. The SSC has recently come under new leadership, and I was afraid that the standard would have dropped particularly with the shaky start they had. This was no doubt made worse by the inclusion of a rather agitated children’s choir which seemed to be always just slightly ahead of the beat. Of course, even I can’t bring myself to criticise children too harshly. Nonetheless, in these first moments the two choirs and the orchestra seemed almost to be fighting each other as to whose tempo was the right one.

It’s fortunate then that the three separate entities somehow became one in the thrilling finale to the second act, the highlight of the evening for me. The choir was perfect here, and the understanding from every singer of what they were meant to do was unprecedented. This was made even better by some clever staging where the offstage snare drum and piccolo walked on stage, leading the singers off in a festive march as the choirs waved goodbye. This kind of staging is precisely what an opera like this needs; it doesn’t require props but pulls the audience deeply into the story. The simplicity of the staging in the fourth act was also a fantastic example of how this can be done; the dimmed stage and a single chair had the entire audience fawning over the intimacy of Mimi and Rodolfo. Many a tear was shed in these final moments, the emotional impact of just the music and a simple prop far more effective than the garish backdrop and silly weapons.

On a more sour note, I’d liketo mention <i>Quando M’en vo’</i>, Musetta’s aria in Act 2. This was not to my taste at all. Although Musetta certainly has an attractive personality, her intonation in this aria was criminal. Beyond that, the communication with the orchestra was especially poor in this aria, with the conductor seeming confused at the singer’s intention. This was a huge letdown for me as it’s my favourite aria in this opera. It seemed like the singer understood that this song is not a serious one, but then made the mistake of not treating it seriously. Just because the song isn’t serious in subject material doesn’t mean you should sing it in a way that seems <i>only</i> to want to provoke laughs from the audience. Humour is great, but beyond a shallow laugh singers should try and stir far deeper emotions especially when presenting the beautiful work of Puccini.

These emotions came to the forefront in the closing moments, once again with a duet between the two main stars. This interpretation of <i>Sono Andati?</i> was as good as any I’ve ever heard, and to their credit the supporting cast were able to behave themselves and lend a considered touch that turned this piece from good to exceptional. This led to one of the most inspired moments of the night, an almost Mahlerian cadence to C sharp minor as Rodolfo mourns over the dead body of his lover. I really didn't expect the huge <i>crescendo</i> and <i>ritardando</i> here. Who says the SSO is always boring and predictable? Unfortunately, while I was wiping the tears away some people in the audience had the audacity to immediately start clapping at a character’s death. Maybe they just couldn’t wait to go home, but the concert etiquette in Singapore has a long way to go. We’d better not play Mahler 9 until this problem is resolved…

<i>La Boheme</i> surpassed my expectations in many ways; this is leaps and bounds ahead of last year’s embarrassing concert production of <i>Carmen</i>. Tonight’s concert was proof that opera can succeed even without elaborate stages and choreography. Less is often more, and there’s a charm to the artist who cleverly uses his resources to create magic. In the end, it’s the music and the drama that should take centre stage, as it mostly did tonight. The audience’s standing ovation is clearly a testament to that statement. For me, I don’t think we are quite at that level just yet, but if this rate of improvement holds, I’ll definitely be standing at next year’s opera production by the SSO.
